README.md, before:

# PyForge CLI

<div align="center">
  <img src="assets/icon_pyforge_forge.svg" alt="PyForge CLI" width="128" height="128">
</div>

<div align="center">
  <strong>A powerful command-line tool for data format conversion and manipulation, built with Python and Click.</strong>
</div>

## 📖 Documentation

**[📚 Complete Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/)** | **[🚀 Quick Start](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/getting-started/quick-start)** | **[📦 Installation Guide](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/getting-started/installation)** | **[🔧 CLI Reference](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/reference/cli-reference)**

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyforge-cli.svg" alt="PyPI version">
  </a>
  <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyforge-cli.svg" alt="Python versions">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/actions">
    <img src="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/workflows/CI/badge.svg" alt="CI Status">
  </a>
</div>

## Features

- **PDF to Text Conversion**: Extract text from PDF documents with advanced options
- **Excel to Parquet Conversion**: Convert Excel files (.xlsx) to Parquet format with multi-sheet support
- **XML to Parquet Conversion**: Intelligent XML flattening with automatic structure detection and configurable strategies
- **Database File Conversion**: Convert Microsoft Access (.mdb/.accdb), DBF, and SQL Server MDF files to Parquet
- **MDF Tools Installer**: Automated setup of Docker and SQL Server Express for MDF file processing
- **CSV to Parquet Conversion**: Smart delimiter detection and encoding handling
- **Rich CLI Interface**: Beautiful terminal output with progress bars and tables
- **Intelligent Processing**: Automatic encoding detection, structure analysis, and column matching
- **Extensible Architecture**: Plugin-based system for adding new format converters
- **Metadata Extraction**: Get detailed information about your files
- **Cross-platform**: Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux

## Installation

### Stable Version (Recommended)

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli
```

### Development Version

To test the latest features and bug fixes before they're officially released:

```bash
# Install from PyPI Test (latest development version)
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli

# Or with dependency fallback
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ \
           --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple/ \
           pyforge-cli
```

> **Note**: Development versions follow the pattern `X.Y.Z.devN+gCOMMIT` and are automatically deployed from the main branch.

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e .
```

### Development Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"
```

### System Dependencies

For MDB/Access file support on non-Windows systems:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install mdbtools

# macOS
brew install mdbtools
```

### MDF File Processing Setup

For SQL Server MDF file conversion, install the MDF Tools:

```bash
# Interactive setup wizard
pyforge install mdf-tools

# Check installation status
pyforge mdf-tools status
```

This installs Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express automatically. See [MDF Tools Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/converters/mdf-tools-installer) for details.

## Quick Start

### Convert PDF to Text

```bash
# Convert entire PDF
pyforge convert document.pdf

# Convert to specific output file
pyforge convert document.pdf output.txt

# Convert specific page range
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "1-5"

# Include page metadata
pyforge convert document.pdf --metadata
```

### Convert Excel to Parquet

```bash
# Convert Excel file to Parquet
pyforge convert data.xlsx

# Convert with specific compression
pyforge convert data.xlsx --compression gzip

# Convert specific sheets only
pyforge convert data.xlsx --sheets "Sheet1,Sheet3"
```

### Convert Database Files

```bash
# Convert Access database to Parquet
pyforge convert database.mdb

# Convert DBF file with encoding detection
pyforge convert data.dbf

# Convert with custom output directory
pyforge convert database.accdb output_folder/
```

### Convert CSV Files

```bash
# Convert CSV with automatic delimiter and encoding detection
pyforge convert data.csv

# Convert TSV (tab-separated) file
pyforge convert data.tsv

# Convert with compression
pyforge convert sales_data.csv --compression gzip

# Convert delimited text file
pyforge convert export.txt
```

### Convert XML Files

```bash
# Convert XML with automatic structure detection
pyforge convert data.xml

# Convert with aggressive flattening for analytics
pyforge convert catalog.xml --flatten-strategy aggressive

# Handle arrays by expanding to multiple rows
pyforge convert orders.xml --array-handling expand

# Strip namespaces for cleaner column names
pyforge convert api_response.xml --namespace-handling strip

# Preview schema before conversion
pyforge convert complex.xml --preview-schema
```

### Get File Information

```bash
# Display file metadata as table
pyforge info document.pdf

# Get Excel file information
pyforge info spreadsheet.xlsx

# Output metadata as JSON
pyforge info database.mdb --format json
```

### List Supported Formats

```bash
pyforge formats
```

### Validate Files

```bash
pyforge validate document.pdf
pyforge validate data.xlsx
```

### MDF File Processing

```bash
# Step 1: Install MDF processing tools (one-time setup)
pyforge install mdf-tools

# Step 2: Check installation status
pyforge mdf-tools status

# Step 3: Start SQL Server (if not running)
pyforge mdf-tools start

# Step 4: Convert MDF files (when MDF converter is available)
# pyforge convert database.mdf --format parquet

# Container management
pyforge mdf-tools stop      # Stop SQL Server
pyforge mdf-tools restart   # Restart SQL Server
pyforge mdf-tools logs      # View SQL Server logs
pyforge mdf-tools test      # Test connectivity
pyforge mdf-tools config    # Show configuration
pyforge mdf-tools uninstall # Remove everything
```

## Usage Examples

### Basic PDF Conversion

```bash
# Convert PDF to text (creates report.txt in same directory)
pyforge convert report.pdf

# Convert with custom output path
pyforge convert report.pdf /path/to/output.txt

# Convert with verbose output
pyforge convert report.pdf --verbose

# Force overwrite existing file
pyforge convert report.pdf output.txt --force
```

### Advanced PDF Options

```bash
# Convert pages 1-10
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "1-10"

# Convert from page 5 to end
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "5-"

# Convert up to page 10
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "-10"

# Include page markers in output
pyforge convert document.pdf --metadata
```

### Excel Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert Excel with all sheets
pyforge convert sales_data.xlsx

# Interactive mode - prompts for sheet selection
pyforge convert multi_sheet.xlsx --interactive

# Convert sheets with matching columns into single file
pyforge convert monthly_reports.xlsx --merge-sheets

# Generate summary report
pyforge convert data.xlsx --summary
```

### Database Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert Access database (all tables)
pyforge convert company.mdb

# Convert with progress tracking
pyforge convert large_database.accdb --verbose

# Convert DBF with specific encoding
pyforge convert legacy.dbf --encoding cp1252

# Batch convert all DBF files in directory
for file in *.dbf; do pyforge convert "$file"; done
```

### CSV Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert CSV with automatic detection
pyforge convert sales_data.csv

# Convert international CSV with auto-encoding detection
pyforge convert european_data.csv --verbose

# Convert semicolon-delimited CSV (European format)
pyforge convert data_semicolon.csv

# Convert tab-separated file with compression
pyforge convert data.tsv --compression gzip

# Batch convert multiple CSV files
for file in *.csv; do pyforge convert "$file" --compression snappy; done
```

### XML Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert XML with automatic structure detection
pyforge convert catalog.xml

# Convert with aggressive flattening for data analysis
pyforge convert api_response.xml --flatten-strategy aggressive

# Handle arrays as concatenated strings
pyforge convert orders.xml --array-handling concatenate

# Strip namespaces for cleaner output
pyforge convert soap_response.xml --namespace-handling strip

# Preview structure before conversion
pyforge convert complex_structure.xml --preview-schema

# Convert compressed XML files
pyforge convert data.xml.gz --verbose

# Batch convert XML files with specific strategy
for file in *.xml; do pyforge convert "$file" --flatten-strategy moderate; done
```

### File Information

```bash
# Show file metadata
pyforge info document.pdf

# Excel file details (sheets, row counts)
pyforge info spreadsheet.xlsx

# Database file information (tables, record counts)
pyforge info database.mdb

# Export metadata as JSON
pyforge info document.pdf --format json > metadata.json
```

## Supported Formats

| Input Format | Output Formats | Status |
|-------------|----------------|---------|
| PDF (.pdf)  | Text (.txt)    | ✅ Available |
| Excel (.xlsx) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| XML (.xml, .xml.gz, .xml.bz2) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| Access (.mdb/.accdb) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| DBF (.dbf)  | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| CSV (.csv, .tsv, .txt) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |

## Development

### Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI

# Set up development environment
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Format code
black src tests

# Run all checks
ruff check src tests
```

### Development Commands

```bash
# Testing
pytest                                    # Run tests
pytest --cov=pyforge_cli                 # Run tests with coverage

# Code Quality
black src tests                          # Format code
ruff check src tests                     # Run linting
mypy src                                 # Type checking

# Building
python -m build                          # Build distribution packages
twine upload dist/*                      # Publish to PyPI
```

### Project Structure

```text
PyForge-CLI/
├── src/pyforge_cli/            # Main package
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── main.py                 # CLI entry point
│   ├── converters/             # Format converters
│   │   ├── __init__.py
│   │   ├── base.py            # Base converter class
│   │   ├── pdf_converter.py   # PDF to text conversion
│   │   ├── excel_converter.py # Excel to Parquet conversion
│   │   ├── mdb_converter.py   # MDB/ACCDB to Parquet conversion
│   │   └── dbf_converter.py   # DBF to Parquet conversion
│   ├── plugins/               # Plugin system
│   │   └── loader.py          # Plugin loading
│   └── utils/                 # Utilities
│       ├── file_utils.py      # File operations
│       └── cli_utils.py       # CLI helpers
├── docs/                      # Documentation source
├── tests/                     # Test files
├── pyproject.toml            # Project configuration
└── README.md                 # This file
```

## Requirements

- Python 3.8+
- PyMuPDF (for PDF processing)
- Click (for CLI interface)
- Rich (for beautiful terminal output)
- Pandas & PyArrow (for data processing and Parquet support)
- pandas-access (for MDB file support)
- dbfread (for DBF file support)
- openpyxl (for Excel file support)
- chardet (for encoding detection)

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests and linting (`pytest && ruff check src tests`)
5. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Roadmap

### Version 0.2.0 - Database & Spreadsheet Support (Completed)
- ✅ **Excel to Parquet Conversion**
  - Multi-sheet support with intelligent detection
  - Interactive sheet selection mode
  - Column matching for combined output
  - Progress tracking and summary reports
- ✅ **MDB/ACCDB to Parquet Conversion**
  - Microsoft Access database support (.mdb, .accdb)
  - Automatic table discovery
  - Cross-platform compatibility (Windows/Linux/macOS)
  - Excel summary reports with sample data
- ✅ **DBF to Parquet Conversion**
  - Automatic encoding detection
  - Support for various DBF formats
  - Robust error handling for corrupted files

### Version 0.3.0 - Enhanced Features (Released)
- ✅ **XML to Parquet Conversion**
  - Automatic XML structure detection and analysis
  - Intelligent flattening strategies (conservative, moderate, aggressive)
  - Array handling modes (expand, concatenate, json_string)
  - Namespace processing (preserve, strip, prefix)
  - Schema preview before conversion
  - Support for compressed XML files (.xml.gz, .xml.bz2)
- ✅ **CSV to Parquet conversion** with auto-detection (string-based)
- [ ] CSV schema inference and native type conversion
- [ ] JSON processing and flattening
- [ ] Data validation and cleaning options
- [ ] Batch processing with pattern matching
- [ ] Configuration file support
- [ ] REST API wrapper for notebook integration
- [ ] Data type preservation options (beyond string conversion)

### Version 0.4.0 - MDF Tools Infrastructure (Completed)
- ✅ **MDF Tools Installer**
  - Automated Docker Desktop installation (macOS/Windows/Linux)
  - SQL Server Express 2019 container setup
  - Interactive setup wizard with non-interactive mode
  - Cross-platform compatibility with system package managers
- ✅ **Container Management Commands**
  - 9 lifecycle commands: status, start, stop, restart, logs, test, config, uninstall
  - Rich terminal UI with status tables and progress tracking
  - Configuration management with JSON persistence
  - Health monitoring and connectivity testing
- ✅ **Infrastructure Foundation**
  - Complete Docker and SQL Server environment for MDF processing
  - Foundation ready for MDF file conversion implementation
  - Comprehensive documentation with live terminal examples
  - ASCII architecture diagrams and troubleshooting guides

### Version 0.5.0 - MDF File Conversion (Planned)
- [ ] **MDF to Parquet Converter** (Issue #13)
  - SQL Server MDF file attachment and processing
  - 6-stage conversion process (matching MDB converter)
  - String-only data conversion for Phase 1 consistency
  - Batch processing with progress tracking
  - Excel summary reports with conversion statistics

### Version 0.5.1 - Test Datasets Collection (Planned)
- [ ] **Sample Datasets Installation** (Issue #15)
  - CLI command: `pyforge install sample-datasets`
  - Curated test datasets for all formats (XML, MDF, DBF, MDB, CSV, PDF)
  - Multiple size categories: small (<1MB), medium (1-100MB), large (100MB-3GB)
  - Direct download from online sources with metadata
  - Organized directory structure for testing scenarios

### Version 0.6.0 - Advanced Features (Future)
- [ ] SQL query support for database files
- [ ] Data transformation pipelines
- [ ] Cloud storage integration (S3, Azure Blob)
- [ ] Incremental/delta conversions
- [ ] Custom plugin development SDK

## Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [📚 Complete Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/)
2. Search [existing issues](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues)
3. Create a [new issue](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues/new)
4. Join the [discussion](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/discussions)

## Changelog

### 0.4.0 (Current Release)

- ✅ **MDF Tools Installer**: Complete automated Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express 2019 setup
- ✅ **Cross-Platform Installation**: System package managers (Homebrew, Winget, apt/yum)
- ✅ **Container Management**: 9 lifecycle commands for SQL Server operations
- ✅ **Interactive Setup Wizard**: User-guided installation with smart detection
- ✅ **Rich Terminal UI**: Beautiful status tables, progress bars, and error handling
- ✅ **Critical Docker Fix**: Proper system package manager installation (not pip)
- ✅ **Infrastructure Foundation**: Complete environment for MDF file processing
- ✅ **Comprehensive Documentation**: Live terminal examples and ASCII diagrams

### 0.3.0

- ✅ **XML to Parquet Converter**: Complete implementation with intelligent flattening
- ✅ **Automatic Structure Detection**: Analyzes XML hierarchy and array patterns
- ✅ **Flexible Flattening Strategies**: Conservative, moderate, and aggressive options
- ✅ **Advanced Array Handling**: Expand, concatenate, or JSON string modes
- ✅ **Namespace Support**: Configurable namespace processing
- ✅ **Schema Preview**: Optional structure preview before conversion
- ✅ **Comprehensive Documentation**: User guide and quick reference
- ✅ **Compressed XML Support**: Handles .xml.gz and .xml.bz2 files

### 0.2.1

- ✅ **Complete Documentation Site**: Comprehensive GitHub Pages documentation
- ✅ **Fixed CI/CD**: GitHub Actions workflow for automated PyPI publishing  
- ✅ **Improved Distribution**: API token authentication and automation
- ✅ **Better Navigation**: Fixed broken links and improved project structure

### 0.2.0

- ✅ Excel to Parquet conversion with multi-sheet support
- ✅ MDB/ACCDB to Parquet conversion with cross-platform support
- ✅ DBF to Parquet conversion with encoding detection
- ✅ Interactive mode for Excel sheet selection
- ✅ Automatic table discovery for database files
- ✅ Progress tracking with rich terminal UI
- ✅ Excel summary reports for batch conversions
- ✅ Robust error handling and recovery

### 0.1.0 (Initial Release)

- PDF to text conversion
- CLI interface with Click
- Rich terminal output
- File metadata extraction
- Page range support
- Development tooling setup

## 🚀 Development & Deployment

### Automated Versioning

PyForge CLI uses automated versioning with setuptools-scm:

- **Development versions**: `1.0.x.devN` - Auto-deployed to [PyPI Test](https://test.pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/) on every commit to main
- **Release versions**: `1.0.x` - Deployed to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/) when Git tags are created
- **Version increment**: Development versions auto-increment on each commit (dev1 → dev2 → dev3...)

### Installation from Test Repository

```bash
# Install latest development version
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli

# Install specific development version
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli==1.0.7.dev4
```

Commit message:

Enhance CI/CD documentation with pipeline details
- Add CI/CD pipeline explanation
- Update example version number to match current dev5
- Document trigger conditions for PyPI Test vs Production
- Add testing workflow recommendations

README.md, after:

# PyForge CLI

<div align="center">
  <img src="assets/icon_pyforge_forge.svg" alt="PyForge CLI" width="128" height="128">
</div>

<div align="center">
  <strong>A powerful command-line tool for data format conversion and manipulation, built with Python and Click.</strong>
</div>

## 📖 Documentation

**[📚 Complete Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/)** | **[🚀 Quick Start](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/getting-started/quick-start)** | **[📦 Installation Guide](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/getting-started/installation)** | **[🔧 CLI Reference](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/reference/cli-reference)**

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyforge-cli.svg" alt="PyPI version">
  </a>
  <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyforge-cli.svg" alt="Python versions">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/actions">
    <img src="https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/workflows/CI/badge.svg" alt="CI Status">
  </a>
</div>

## Features

- **PDF to Text Conversion**: Extract text from PDF documents with advanced options
- **Excel to Parquet Conversion**: Convert Excel files (.xlsx) to Parquet format with multi-sheet support
- **XML to Parquet Conversion**: Intelligent XML flattening with automatic structure detection and configurable strategies
- **Database File Conversion**: Convert Microsoft Access (.mdb/.accdb), DBF, and SQL Server MDF files to Parquet
- **MDF Tools Installer**: Automated setup of Docker and SQL Server Express for MDF file processing
- **CSV to Parquet Conversion**: Smart delimiter detection and encoding handling
- **Rich CLI Interface**: Beautiful terminal output with progress bars and tables
- **Intelligent Processing**: Automatic encoding detection, structure analysis, and column matching
- **Extensible Architecture**: Plugin-based system for adding new format converters
- **Metadata Extraction**: Get detailed information about your files
- **Cross-platform**: Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux

## Installation

### Stable Version (Recommended)

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli
```

### Development Version

To test the latest features and bug fixes before they're officially released:

```bash
# Install from PyPI Test (latest development version)
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli

# Or with dependency fallback
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ \
           --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple/ \
           pyforge-cli
```

> **Note**: Development versions follow the pattern `X.Y.Z.devN+gCOMMIT` and are automatically deployed from the main branch.

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e .
```

### Development Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"
```

### System Dependencies

For MDB/Access file support on non-Windows systems:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install mdbtools

# macOS
brew install mdbtools
```

### MDF File Processing Setup

For SQL Server MDF file conversion, install the MDF Tools:

```bash
# Interactive setup wizard
pyforge install mdf-tools

# Check installation status
pyforge mdf-tools status
```

This installs Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express automatically. See [MDF Tools Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/converters/mdf-tools-installer) for details.

## Quick Start

### Convert PDF to Text

```bash
# Convert entire PDF
pyforge convert document.pdf

# Convert to specific output file
pyforge convert document.pdf output.txt

# Convert specific page range
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "1-5"

# Include page metadata
pyforge convert document.pdf --metadata
```

### Convert Excel to Parquet

```bash
# Convert Excel file to Parquet
pyforge convert data.xlsx

# Convert with specific compression
pyforge convert data.xlsx --compression gzip

# Convert specific sheets only
pyforge convert data.xlsx --sheets "Sheet1,Sheet3"
```

### Convert Database Files

```bash
# Convert Access database to Parquet
pyforge convert database.mdb

# Convert DBF file with encoding detection
pyforge convert data.dbf

# Convert with custom output directory
pyforge convert database.accdb output_folder/
```

### Convert CSV Files

```bash
# Convert CSV with automatic delimiter and encoding detection
pyforge convert data.csv

# Convert TSV (tab-separated) file
pyforge convert data.tsv

# Convert with compression
pyforge convert sales_data.csv --compression gzip

# Convert delimited text file
pyforge convert export.txt
```

### Convert XML Files

```bash
# Convert XML with automatic structure detection
pyforge convert data.xml

# Convert with aggressive flattening for analytics
pyforge convert catalog.xml --flatten-strategy aggressive

# Handle arrays by expanding to multiple rows
pyforge convert orders.xml --array-handling expand

# Strip namespaces for cleaner column names
pyforge convert api_response.xml --namespace-handling strip

# Preview schema before conversion
pyforge convert complex.xml --preview-schema
```

### Get File Information

```bash
# Display file metadata as table
pyforge info document.pdf

# Get Excel file information
pyforge info spreadsheet.xlsx

# Output metadata as JSON
pyforge info database.mdb --format json
```

### List Supported Formats

```bash
pyforge formats
```

### Validate Files

```bash
pyforge validate document.pdf
pyforge validate data.xlsx
```

### MDF File Processing

```bash
# Step 1: Install MDF processing tools (one-time setup)
pyforge install mdf-tools

# Step 2: Check installation status
pyforge mdf-tools status

# Step 3: Start SQL Server (if not running)
pyforge mdf-tools start

# Step 4: Convert MDF files (when MDF converter is available)
# pyforge convert database.mdf --format parquet

# Container management
pyforge mdf-tools stop      # Stop SQL Server
pyforge mdf-tools restart   # Restart SQL Server
pyforge mdf-tools logs      # View SQL Server logs
pyforge mdf-tools test      # Test connectivity
pyforge mdf-tools config    # Show configuration
pyforge mdf-tools uninstall # Remove everything
```

## Usage Examples

### Basic PDF Conversion

```bash
# Convert PDF to text (creates report.txt in same directory)
pyforge convert report.pdf

# Convert with custom output path
pyforge convert report.pdf /path/to/output.txt

# Convert with verbose output
pyforge convert report.pdf --verbose

# Force overwrite existing file
pyforge convert report.pdf output.txt --force
```

### Advanced PDF Options

```bash
# Convert pages 1-10
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "1-10"

# Convert from page 5 to end
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "5-"

# Convert up to page 10
pyforge convert document.pdf --pages "-10"

# Include page markers in output
pyforge convert document.pdf --metadata
```

### Excel Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert Excel with all sheets
pyforge convert sales_data.xlsx

# Interactive mode - prompts for sheet selection
pyforge convert multi_sheet.xlsx --interactive

# Convert sheets with matching columns into single file
pyforge convert monthly_reports.xlsx --merge-sheets

# Generate summary report
pyforge convert data.xlsx --summary
```

### Database Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert Access database (all tables)
pyforge convert company.mdb

# Convert with progress tracking
pyforge convert large_database.accdb --verbose

# Convert DBF with specific encoding
pyforge convert legacy.dbf --encoding cp1252

# Batch convert all DBF files in directory
for file in *.dbf; do pyforge convert "$file"; done
```

### CSV Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert CSV with automatic detection
pyforge convert sales_data.csv

# Convert international CSV with auto-encoding detection
pyforge convert european_data.csv --verbose

# Convert semicolon-delimited CSV (European format)
pyforge convert data_semicolon.csv

# Convert tab-separated file with compression
pyforge convert data.tsv --compression gzip

# Batch convert multiple CSV files
for file in *.csv; do pyforge convert "$file" --compression snappy; done
```

### XML Conversion Examples

```bash
# Convert XML with automatic structure detection
pyforge convert catalog.xml

# Convert with aggressive flattening for data analysis
pyforge convert api_response.xml --flatten-strategy aggressive

# Handle arrays as concatenated strings
pyforge convert orders.xml --array-handling concatenate

# Strip namespaces for cleaner output
pyforge convert soap_response.xml --namespace-handling strip

# Preview structure before conversion
pyforge convert complex_structure.xml --preview-schema

# Convert compressed XML files
pyforge convert data.xml.gz --verbose

# Batch convert XML files with specific strategy
for file in *.xml; do pyforge convert "$file" --flatten-strategy moderate; done
```

### File Information

```bash
# Show file metadata
pyforge info document.pdf

# Excel file details (sheets, row counts)
pyforge info spreadsheet.xlsx

# Database file information (tables, record counts)
pyforge info database.mdb

# Export metadata as JSON
pyforge info document.pdf --format json > metadata.json
```

## Supported Formats

| Input Format | Output Formats | Status |
|-------------|----------------|---------|
| PDF (.pdf)  | Text (.txt)    | ✅ Available |
| Excel (.xlsx) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| XML (.xml, .xml.gz, .xml.bz2) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| Access (.mdb/.accdb) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| DBF (.dbf)  | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |
| CSV (.csv, .tsv, .txt) | Parquet (.parquet) | ✅ Available |

## Development

### Setting Up Development Environment

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI

# Set up development environment
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Format code
black src tests

# Run all checks
ruff check src tests
```

### Development Commands

```bash
# Testing
pytest                                    # Run tests
pytest --cov=pyforge_cli                 # Run tests with coverage

# Code Quality
black src tests                          # Format code
ruff check src tests                     # Run linting
mypy src                                 # Type checking

# Building
python -m build                          # Build distribution packages
twine upload dist/*                      # Publish to PyPI
```

### Project Structure

```text
PyForge-CLI/
├── src/pyforge_cli/            # Main package
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── main.py                 # CLI entry point
│   ├── converters/             # Format converters
│   │   ├── __init__.py
│   │   ├── base.py            # Base converter class
│   │   ├── pdf_converter.py   # PDF to text conversion
│   │   ├── excel_converter.py # Excel to Parquet conversion
│   │   ├── mdb_converter.py   # MDB/ACCDB to Parquet conversion
│   │   └── dbf_converter.py   # DBF to Parquet conversion
│   ├── plugins/               # Plugin system
│   │   └── loader.py          # Plugin loading
│   └── utils/                 # Utilities
│       ├── file_utils.py      # File operations
│       └── cli_utils.py       # CLI helpers
├── docs/                      # Documentation source
├── tests/                     # Test files
├── pyproject.toml            # Project configuration
└── README.md                 # This file
```

## Requirements

- Python 3.8+
- PyMuPDF (for PDF processing)
- Click (for CLI interface)
- Rich (for beautiful terminal output)
- Pandas & PyArrow (for data processing and Parquet support)
- pandas-access (for MDB file support)
- dbfread (for DBF file support)
- openpyxl (for Excel file support)
- chardet (for encoding detection)

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests and linting (`pytest && ruff check src tests`)
5. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Roadmap

### Version 0.2.0 - Database & Spreadsheet Support (Completed)
- ✅ **Excel to Parquet Conversion**
  - Multi-sheet support with intelligent detection
  - Interactive sheet selection mode
  - Column matching for combined output
  - Progress tracking and summary reports
- ✅ **MDB/ACCDB to Parquet Conversion**
  - Microsoft Access database support (.mdb, .accdb)
  - Automatic table discovery
  - Cross-platform compatibility (Windows/Linux/macOS)
  - Excel summary reports with sample data
- ✅ **DBF to Parquet Conversion**
  - Automatic encoding detection
  - Support for various DBF formats
  - Robust error handling for corrupted files

### Version 0.3.0 - Enhanced Features (Released)
- ✅ **XML to Parquet Conversion**
  - Automatic XML structure detection and analysis
  - Intelligent flattening strategies (conservative, moderate, aggressive)
  - Array handling modes (expand, concatenate, json_string)
  - Namespace processing (preserve, strip, prefix)
  - Schema preview before conversion
  - Support for compressed XML files (.xml.gz, .xml.bz2)
- ✅ **CSV to Parquet conversion** with auto-detection (string-based)
- [ ] CSV schema inference and native type conversion
- [ ] JSON processing and flattening
- [ ] Data validation and cleaning options
- [ ] Batch processing with pattern matching
- [ ] Configuration file support
- [ ] REST API wrapper for notebook integration
- [ ] Data type preservation options (beyond string conversion)

### Version 0.4.0 - MDF Tools Infrastructure (Completed)
- ✅ **MDF Tools Installer**
  - Automated Docker Desktop installation (macOS/Windows/Linux)
  - SQL Server Express 2019 container setup
  - Interactive setup wizard with non-interactive mode
  - Cross-platform compatibility with system package managers
- ✅ **Container Management Commands**
  - 9 lifecycle commands: status, start, stop, restart, logs, test, config, uninstall
  - Rich terminal UI with status tables and progress tracking
  - Configuration management with JSON persistence
  - Health monitoring and connectivity testing
- ✅ **Infrastructure Foundation**
  - Complete Docker and SQL Server environment for MDF processing
  - Foundation ready for MDF file conversion implementation
  - Comprehensive documentation with live terminal examples
  - ASCII architecture diagrams and troubleshooting guides

### Version 0.5.0 - MDF File Conversion (Planned)
- [ ] **MDF to Parquet Converter** (Issue #13)
  - SQL Server MDF file attachment and processing
  - 6-stage conversion process (matching MDB converter)
  - String-only data conversion for Phase 1 consistency
  - Batch processing with progress tracking
  - Excel summary reports with conversion statistics

### Version 0.5.1 - Test Datasets Collection (Planned)
- [ ] **Sample Datasets Installation** (Issue #15)
  - CLI command: `pyforge install sample-datasets`
  - Curated test datasets for all formats (XML, MDF, DBF, MDB, CSV, PDF)
  - Multiple size categories: small (<1MB), medium (1-100MB), large (100MB-3GB)
  - Direct download from online sources with metadata
  - Organized directory structure for testing scenarios

### Version 0.6.0 - Advanced Features (Future)
- [ ] SQL query support for database files
- [ ] Data transformation pipelines
- [ ] Cloud storage integration (S3, Azure Blob)
- [ ] Incremental/delta conversions
- [ ] Custom plugin development SDK

## Support

If you encounter any issues or have questions:

1. Check the [📚 Complete Documentation](https://py-forge-cli.github.io/PyForge-CLI/)
2. Search [existing issues](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues)
3. Create a [new issue](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues/new)
4. Join the [discussion](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/discussions)

## Changelog

### 0.4.0 (Current Release)

- ✅ **MDF Tools Installer**: Complete automated Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express 2019 setup
- ✅ **Cross-Platform Installation**: System package managers (Homebrew, Winget, apt/yum)
- ✅ **Container Management**: 9 lifecycle commands for SQL Server operations
- ✅ **Interactive Setup Wizard**: User-guided installation with smart detection
- ✅ **Rich Terminal UI**: Beautiful status tables, progress bars, and error handling
- ✅ **Critical Docker Fix**: Proper system package manager installation (not pip)
- ✅ **Infrastructure Foundation**: Complete environment for MDF file processing
- ✅ **Comprehensive Documentation**: Live terminal examples and ASCII diagrams

### 0.3.0

- ✅ **XML to Parquet Converter**: Complete implementation with intelligent flattening
- ✅ **Automatic Structure Detection**: Analyzes XML hierarchy and array patterns
- ✅ **Flexible Flattening Strategies**: Conservative, moderate, and aggressive options
- ✅ **Advanced Array Handling**: Expand, concatenate, or JSON string modes
- ✅ **Namespace Support**: Configurable namespace processing
- ✅ **Schema Preview**: Optional structure preview before conversion
- ✅ **Comprehensive Documentation**: User guide and quick reference
- ✅ **Compressed XML Support**: Handles .xml.gz and .xml.bz2 files

### 0.2.1

- ✅ **Complete Documentation Site**: Comprehensive GitHub Pages documentation
- ✅ **Fixed CI/CD**: GitHub Actions workflow for automated PyPI publishing  
- ✅ **Improved Distribution**: API token authentication and automation
- ✅ **Better Navigation**: Fixed broken links and improved project structure

### 0.2.0

- ✅ Excel to Parquet conversion with multi-sheet support
- ✅ MDB/ACCDB to Parquet conversion with cross-platform support
- ✅ DBF to Parquet conversion with encoding detection
- ✅ Interactive mode for Excel sheet selection
- ✅ Automatic table discovery for database files
- ✅ Progress tracking with rich terminal UI
- ✅ Excel summary reports for batch conversions
- ✅ Robust error handling and recovery

### 0.1.0 (Initial Release)

- PDF to text conversion
- CLI interface with Click
- Rich terminal output
- File metadata extraction
- Page range support
- Development tooling setup

## 🚀 Development & Deployment

### Automated Versioning

PyForge CLI uses automated versioning with setuptools-scm:

- **Development versions**: `1.0.x.devN` - Auto-deployed to [PyPI Test](https://test.pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/) on every commit to main
- **Release versions**: `1.0.x` - Deployed to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/pyforge-cli/) when Git tags are created
- **Version increment**: Development versions auto-increment on each commit (dev1 → dev2 → dev3...)

### Installation from Test Repository

```bash
# Install latest development version
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli

# Install specific development version  
pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyforge-cli==1.0.7.dev5
```

### CI/CD Pipeline

- **Trigger**: Every push to `main` branch automatically builds and deploys to PyPI Test
- **Release**: Create a Git tag to trigger deployment to PyPI Production
- **Testing**: Use `pyforge-cli` from test.pypi.org for validation before release
