docs/getting-started/installation.md, before:

# Installation Guide

This guide covers all the ways to install PyForge CLI on your system.

## Quick Install

The fastest way to get started:

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli
```

## Installation Methods

### Method 1: pip (Recommended)

Install from PyPI using pip:

=== "Global Installation"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "User Installation"

    ```bash
    pip install --user pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Virtual Environment"

    ```bash
    python -m venv pyforge-env
    source pyforge-env/bin/activate  # On Windows: pyforge-env\Scripts\activate
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Method 2: pipx (Isolated)

Install in an isolated environment using pipx:

```bash
# Install pipx if you don't have it
pip install pipx

# Install PyForge CLI
pipx install pyforge-cli
```

### Method 3: uv (Fast)

Install using the ultrafast uv package manager:

```bash
# Install uv if you don't have it
pip install uv

# Install PyForge CLI
uv add pyforge-cli
```

### Method 4: From Source

For development or latest features:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e .
```

## System Requirements

### Python Version
- **Python 3.8+** (recommended: Python 3.11+)
- Works on Python 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12

### Operating Systems
- **Windows** 10/11 (x64)
- **macOS** 10.14+ (Intel and Apple Silicon)
- **Linux** (Ubuntu 18.04+, CentOS 7+, and other distributions)

## Platform-Specific Setup

### Windows

=== "Command Prompt"

    ```cmd
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "PowerShell"

    ```powershell
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "Windows Terminal"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

!!! note "Windows Path Issues"
    If `pyforge` is not found after installation, you may need to add Python's Scripts directory to your PATH. The installer should do this automatically, but if it doesn't:
    
    1. Find your Python installation directory
    2. Add `Python\Scripts` to your PATH environment variable
    3. Restart your terminal

### macOS

=== "Terminal"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "Homebrew Python"

    ```bash
    # If using Homebrew Python
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

!!! tip "macOS Setup"
    For the best experience on macOS, we recommend:
    
    ```bash
    # Install Homebrew if you don't have it
    /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
    
    # Install Python via Homebrew
    brew install python
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Linux

=== "Ubuntu/Debian"

    ```bash
    # Update package list
    sudo apt update
    
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo apt install python3 python3-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "CentOS/RHEL/Fedora"

    ```bash
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo dnf install python3 python3-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Arch Linux"

    ```bash
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo pacman -S python python-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

## Additional Dependencies

### For MDB/Access File Support

PyForge CLI requires additional tools for Microsoft Access database conversion:

=== "Ubuntu/Debian"

    ```bash
    sudo apt install mdbtools
    ```

=== "macOS"

    ```bash
    brew install mdbtools
    ```

=== "Windows"

    MDB support is built-in on Windows. No additional tools needed.

=== "CentOS/RHEL/Fedora"

    ```bash
    sudo dnf install mdbtools
    ```

### For PDF Processing

PDF support is included by default with PyMuPDF. No additional setup required.

### For Excel Files

Excel support is included by default with openpyxl. No additional setup required.

## Verification

After installation, verify that PyForge CLI is working correctly:

```bash
# Check version
pyforge --version

# Show help
pyforge --help

# List supported formats
pyforge formats

# Test with a simple command
pyforge validate --help
```

Expected output:
```
pyforge, version 0.2.1
```

## Troubleshooting

### Command Not Found

If you get `command not found: pyforge` after installation:

1. **Check if it's in your PATH**:
   ```bash
   python -m pip show pyforge-cli
   ```

2. **Find the installation directory**:
   ```bash
   python -c "import sys; print([p for p in sys.path if 'site-packages' in p][0])"
   ```

3. **Run directly with Python**:
   ```bash
   python -m pyforge_cli --help
   ```

### Permission Errors

If you get permission errors during installation:

=== "Use --user flag"

    ```bash
    pip install --user pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Use virtual environment"

    ```bash
    python -m venv pyforge-env
    source pyforge-env/bin/activate
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Import Errors

If you encounter import errors:

1. **Update pip**:
   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pip
   ```

2. **Reinstall PyForge CLI**:
   ```bash
   pip uninstall pyforge-cli
   pip install pyforge-cli
   ```

3. **Check for conflicting packages**:
   ```bash
   pip list | grep -i pyforge
   ```

### Dependency Conflicts

If you have dependency conflicts:

1. **Use a virtual environment** (recommended)
2. **Update all packages**:
   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pyforge-cli
   ```

## Development Installation

For contributing to PyForge CLI:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"

# Verify installation
pyforge --version
```

## Updating PyForge CLI

To update to the latest version:

```bash
pip install --upgrade pyforge-cli
```

To update to a specific version:

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli==0.2.1
```

## Uninstalling

To remove PyForge CLI:

```bash
pip uninstall pyforge-cli
```

## Next Steps

Now that you have PyForge CLI installed:

1. **[Quick Start](quick-start.md)** - Convert your first file
2. **[First Conversion](first-conversion.md)** - Detailed walkthrough
3. **[CLI Reference](../reference/cli-reference.md)** - Complete command documentation

## Getting Help

If you're still having installation issues:

- Check our [Troubleshooting Guide](../tutorials/troubleshooting.md)
- Search [existing issues](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues)
- Create a [new issue](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues/new) with:
  - Your operating system and version
  - Python version (`python --version`)
  - Complete error message
  - Installation method used

Commit message:

Release v0.4.0: MDF Tools Installer with comprehensive documentation
VERSION UPDATES:
- Bump version to 0.4.0 in __init__.py and pyproject.toml
- Add comprehensive changelog entry for MDF Tools Installer features

DOCUMENTATION ENHANCEMENTS:
- Create new Tools Prerequisites guide in Getting Started section
- Add detailed MDF Tools installation and management documentation
- Update installation guide with MDF tools prerequisites reference
- Enhance quick start guide with MDF workflow examples
- Add Tools Prerequisites to navigation and learning path

FEATURE DOCUMENTATION:
- Document 5-stage installation process with real terminal examples
- Cover SQL Server Express 2019 specifications and limitations
- Include container management commands and troubleshooting
- Add platform-specific installation notes (macOS, Windows, Linux)
- Document system requirements and performance characteristics

The v0.4.0 release introduces complete MDF processing infrastructure
with automated Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express installation,
preparing the foundation for future MDF to Parquet conversion.

docs/getting-started/installation.md, after:

# Installation Guide

This guide covers all the ways to install PyForge CLI on your system.

## Quick Install

The fastest way to get started:

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli
```

## Installation Methods

### Method 1: pip (Recommended)

Install from PyPI using pip:

=== "Global Installation"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "User Installation"

    ```bash
    pip install --user pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Virtual Environment"

    ```bash
    python -m venv pyforge-env
    source pyforge-env/bin/activate  # On Windows: pyforge-env\Scripts\activate
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Method 2: pipx (Isolated)

Install in an isolated environment using pipx:

```bash
# Install pipx if you don't have it
pip install pipx

# Install PyForge CLI
pipx install pyforge-cli
```

### Method 3: uv (Fast)

Install using the ultrafast uv package manager:

```bash
# Install uv if you don't have it
pip install uv

# Install PyForge CLI
uv add pyforge-cli
```

### Method 4: From Source

For development or latest features:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI
pip install -e .
```

## System Requirements

### Python Version
- **Python 3.8+** (recommended: Python 3.11+)
- Works on Python 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12

### Operating Systems
- **Windows** 10/11 (x64)
- **macOS** 10.14+ (Intel and Apple Silicon)
- **Linux** (Ubuntu 18.04+, CentOS 7+, and other distributions)

## Platform-Specific Setup

### Windows

=== "Command Prompt"

    ```cmd
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "PowerShell"

    ```powershell
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "Windows Terminal"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

!!! note "Windows Path Issues"
    If `pyforge` is not found after installation, you may need to add Python's Scripts directory to your PATH. The installer should do this automatically, but if it doesn't:
    
    1. Find your Python installation directory
    2. Add `Python\Scripts` to your PATH environment variable
    3. Restart your terminal

### macOS

=== "Terminal"

    ```bash
    pip install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

=== "Homebrew Python"

    ```bash
    # If using Homebrew Python
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    pyforge --version
    ```

!!! tip "macOS Setup"
    For the best experience on macOS, we recommend:
    
    ```bash
    # Install Homebrew if you don't have it
    /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
    
    # Install Python via Homebrew
    brew install python
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Linux

=== "Ubuntu/Debian"

    ```bash
    # Update package list
    sudo apt update
    
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo apt install python3 python3-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "CentOS/RHEL/Fedora"

    ```bash
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo dnf install python3 python3-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip3 install pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Arch Linux"

    ```bash
    # Install Python and pip
    sudo pacman -S python python-pip
    
    # Install PyForge CLI
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

## Additional Dependencies

### For MDB/Access File Support

PyForge CLI requires additional tools for Microsoft Access database conversion:

=== "Ubuntu/Debian"

    ```bash
    sudo apt install mdbtools
    ```

=== "macOS"

    ```bash
    brew install mdbtools
    ```

=== "Windows"

    MDB support is built-in on Windows. No additional tools needed.

=== "CentOS/RHEL/Fedora"

    ```bash
    sudo dnf install mdbtools
    ```

### For PDF Processing

PDF support is included by default with PyMuPDF. No additional setup required.

### For Excel Files

Excel support is included by default with openpyxl. No additional setup required.

### For SQL Server MDF Files

MDF file processing requires specialized tools that can be installed automatically:

```bash
# Install Docker Desktop and SQL Server Express
pyforge install mdf-tools

# Verify installation
pyforge mdf-tools status
```

For detailed setup instructions, see [Tools Prerequisites](tools-prerequisites.md).

## Verification

After installation, verify that PyForge CLI is working correctly:

```bash
# Check version
pyforge --version

# Show help
pyforge --help

# List supported formats
pyforge formats

# Test with a simple command
pyforge validate --help
```

Expected output:
```
pyforge, version 0.2.1
```

## Troubleshooting

### Command Not Found

If you get `command not found: pyforge` after installation:

1. **Check if it's in your PATH**:
   ```bash
   python -m pip show pyforge-cli
   ```

2. **Find the installation directory**:
   ```bash
   python -c "import sys; print([p for p in sys.path if 'site-packages' in p][0])"
   ```

3. **Run directly with Python**:
   ```bash
   python -m pyforge_cli --help
   ```

### Permission Errors

If you get permission errors during installation:

=== "Use --user flag"

    ```bash
    pip install --user pyforge-cli
    ```

=== "Use virtual environment"

    ```bash
    python -m venv pyforge-env
    source pyforge-env/bin/activate
    pip install pyforge-cli
    ```

### Import Errors

If you encounter import errors:

1. **Update pip**:
   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pip
   ```

2. **Reinstall PyForge CLI**:
   ```bash
   pip uninstall pyforge-cli
   pip install pyforge-cli
   ```

3. **Check for conflicting packages**:
   ```bash
   pip list | grep -i pyforge
   ```

### Dependency Conflicts

If you have dependency conflicts:

1. **Use a virtual environment** (recommended)
2. **Update all packages**:
   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pyforge-cli
   ```

## Development Installation

For contributing to PyForge CLI:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI.git
cd PyForge-CLI

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode
pip install -e ".[dev,test]"

# Verify installation
pyforge --version
```

## Updating PyForge CLI

To update to the latest version:

```bash
pip install --upgrade pyforge-cli
```

To update to a specific version:

```bash
pip install pyforge-cli==0.2.1
```

## Uninstalling

To remove PyForge CLI:

```bash
pip uninstall pyforge-cli
```

## Next Steps

Now that you have PyForge CLI installed:

1. **[Quick Start](quick-start.md)** - Convert your first file
2. **[First Conversion](first-conversion.md)** - Detailed walkthrough
3. **[CLI Reference](../reference/cli-reference.md)** - Complete command documentation

## Getting Help

If you're still having installation issues:

- Check our [Troubleshooting Guide](../tutorials/troubleshooting.md)
- Search [existing issues](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues)
- Create a [new issue](https://github.com/Py-Forge-Cli/PyForge-CLI/issues/new) with:
  - Your operating system and version
  - Python version (`python --version`)
  - Complete error message
  - Installation method used
